First of all, your origins as a writer, it seems to me that you could have
probably gone either way, back either mainstream or science fiction, like, oh,
back in the mid-60s, the first two novels I've located of yours, the Solarians
and the Men in the Jungle. Yeah, Solarians was science fiction, and the Men in
the Jungle was not, correct? Wrong. Oh, Men in the Jungle is? Yes! Oh, okay,
okay, I didn't find the book. I just read somebody who said it was. No, it's a
science fiction novel. It has a lot of relevance to Vietnam and stuff like that
was going on at the time, but it is a science fiction novel. It's not
the same kind of hardcore science fiction that Solaronis is. It takes place on
another planet and everything, but it's a political science fiction novel. Okay,
my question would still have some validity, though. I was going to ask, you must
have wondered whether you should pick up science fiction or whether you should
go into the so-called mainstream. Was that ever a choice you made? Well, I have
actually written three mainstream novels, two of which have been published.
Right. One is the Passing Through the Flame, which was a novel about, among
other things, drug smuggling Hollywood, the record business, movies. And another
one, which is a current one this year, is called The Mind Game, which is about
cults. Then there's a third book called The Children of Hamelin, which was
written in 69 and published, never published as a book, for various political
reasons. It was serialized in the Los Angeles free press in 28 installments
about 70 or 71, and it's just now going to be published next year by an outfit
called Pequod Press in Los Angeles. It's sort of like resurrecting a book that I
thought I would never sell. It was sold in England, never published. It was
about, it's kind of a historical novel about the origins of the counterculture,
in a way. Yeah, I'd read, excuse me, I'd read references to that that had never
been published. It had never been, it was published in, it was serial, the
serialization was published. And, you know, in the free press, which is a big
underground newspaper, a quarter of a million people read it, in pieces or more,
but for various reasons I thought publisher would touch it until now, which is
being done by a small press. Yeah. Well, no, I knew you'd written mainstream
fiction, obviously, but it never has come down to a choice then as to which you
were. Only on each individual. I mean, you know, on each individual book, it
comes down to a choice. Well, I'm sure I will continue to write science fiction
novels. I'm sure I will also continue to write mainstream novels. Just depends
on... And I usually never can plan, want to plan, or do plan, more than one book
ahead. So whatever the next thing I come up with is the novel I do. And
sometimes it's science fiction, sometimes it isn't. So what I've actually
written is seven science fiction novels and three mainstream novels. Okay. One
of your earlier ones, The Agent of Chaos, was that probably your first
successful novel? I mean depends what you mean by success reputation sales well
not much in sales it's a very strange book that book it was published originally
by an author called Belmont about which the less said the better it's never been
out of print yeah go ahead it's never been out of print it's never had a
tremendous number of printing but it's in all what has had a lot of political
effect and has created various movements down through the years still continuing
to do so and i don't even know all of uh the ramifications of what it's created
uh created you know it was uh the inspiration for the zippies for the pie kill
movement uh for certain political groups in europe and now there's another group
in washington that i just got in contact with which called itself something for
paradoxical politics which also uses that book so i guess that was uh the first
book that had that kind of uh social political impact I thought it was, compared
to some of your other work, I thought it was fairly traditional in style and
plot. It had the good guys and the bad guys. At the end, there was the hope of
alien contact and the betterment of humanity and so forth. I'd heard it called
an underground classic on college campuses and so forth. Well, that's why it's
called an underground classic, because it was involved and inspired a lot of
counter-cultural political movements. Which uses it manual. But also, I have
heard from various people that it's a popular book in prisons.
Okay, Book Jack Barron, I guess, is one of your better-known books. I thought
that Jack was a little different type of hero than most of you others. He's more
of an anti-hero, a wenching, cursing, power-hungry kind of individual. To me,
that was very non-traditional, maybe even a little shocking for a normal science
fiction reader. Did you mean for the book and Jack to shock people? Well, there
are two diverse reactions to the character of Jack Barron. One is that he's an
anti-hero, and the other is that he is a hero. What I was trying to do with the
character of Barron, among other things, was... For me, Barron is not an anti
-hero. Darren is a guy who's involved with power, but he has an ambivalent
feeling about it. In other words, he has a sense of personal irony about his own
desires for power. And as the book opens, he's become a TV star because he wants
to get out of chasing after power and just wants to be a star. Then he gets
pulled back into it by a Van Sant Sinon. Actually, what I was trying to do in a
way, the book has a very traditional plot, As far as I was concerned, it has a
positive hero, it has a negative villain, the hero wins, the villain loses, all
that stuff that is considered the traditional way of plotting a book, and yet
it's written in a different kind of way. It kind of takes that superficial kind
of plot and treats it in a realistic manner, which confused a lot of people, I
think. What was the flap in the parliament about that novel? Yeah, that novel
had a lot of trouble. It was written under contract to Doubleday, who then
rejected it. You have to remember the political climate of the era. They didn't
reject it. They said, we'll publish it if you cut out all the sex, all the swear
words, and all the politics, which is the whole book. So it took a long time to
resell that book here. In the meantime, I took it to Milford, to a Milford
conference, and Mike Moorcock was there. And he read it and he like it and he
serialized it in New World. So his first publication was actually in England in
the magazine. Now, halfway through the serialization, I forget exactly which
part, part three, part four, W.A. Smith, which was the biggest distributor,
still is the biggest distributor in England, refused to distribute the magazine
because of the book in it. Now, at that time, New World had an arts council
grant. The arts council is an organ of the British government. Now, the Arts
Council supported the magazine against Smith publicly. But the flap in
Parliament arose when certain right-wing members of Parliament were aghast that
an organ of the British government, the Arts Council, was defending this kind of
stuff. And that's how it became a parliamentary issue. Okay, I'd always thought
that the British exercised more tolerance. They did! Well, that's the whole
point. In other words, the Arts Council was an organ of the government itself.
And the government successfully fought private censorship in a book. The
government, an organ of the government, in a way, the Arts Council, supported
the freedom of the press and supported the magazine and supported the book. The
people in Parliament who objected to this were right-wing members of Parliament
who were aghast at what the government was doing to preserve free press. So it
doesn't reflect at all badly on the English attitude, or even on the attitude of
the government at the time, just on the attitude of a certain faction in
Parliament who felt that the government shouldn't be acting this way. Okay. One
other question I had on that one. Maybe my reaction to Jack as an antihero was a
little off here, but I saw the book more as a comment on the power of the media
and the power of politics rather than a crusade or a didactic treatise or
something of that sort. Would I be right in that response, do you think? Well,
you'd be right in that. And also, I mean, the book is about power.
It's about power itself is neutral as far as I'm concerned. It's what people do
with it that counts. Barron is a guy who likes power and keeps referring to it
as a drug and knows that he could become addicted to it and for that reason has
decided to stay away from it. Then he gets drawn back into playing with power
because he comes to the conclusion that it's better for somebody who feels that
way about power to be wielding it than people who don't have any self
-consciousness about the dangers of wielding power. So in that sense, it's a
comment on the power of the media, but it's also a comment on the morality of
power, on the paradox of power, which is that if you leave power to be wielded
by people who do not see the dangers, the personal dangers, the psychological
dangers of being involved with it then you end up with people like Benedict
Howitz, Ronald Reagan and Richard Nixon who do not have self-consciousness and
this about the personal dangers, the moral dangers of chasing after power
whereas somebody like Barron, who is certainly an imperfect person as all people
are, at least his saving grace if he has one, is that he is well aware of the
personal dangers of being involved in a quest for power. Okay, good. One thing
I've been impressed about when I was reading through your work is the different
styles that you use. The Iron Dream, I think, is one that particularly
fascinated me. Sturgeon, in the introduction to that book, called it a unique
book, belonging to a category all its own. Did you have fun writing that book?
Was it hard to change your style to sort of write down? Well, except at the end
where I wrote the scholarly demolition of the book. Because in order to write
that book, I had to write like Hitler. And in order to get to that point, I had
to read everything Hitler had written, which is very boring indeed. And I had to
also write a book called Hitler's Dinner Conversations, like 800 pages of
Hitler's babblings at the dinner table, which was taken down to a short end by
Martin Borman, a fascinating book. But in order to write the bulk of that book,
Hitler's novel, inside the book, I had to write like Hitler. I had to get inside
Hitler's head. That was not what I could consider a fun experience. In other
words, it was like playing a role. You had to put yourself inside his head.
Yeah, I call that method writing. Exactly like that. And so it was a very
difficult book to write. Kind of a shattering book to write because of the kind
of position I put myself in. Also, of course, Hitler was a terrible writer. So
in order to be accurate, I really had to write something awful, in a way. Also,
Hitler is getting crazier and crazier as he's writing the book, so I got crazier
and crazier as I was writing the book, which was necessary in order to write the
book in the first one.
We're all in the hand.
that thing? Well, the impetus came from a conversation with Mike Whorcock in
London, where I was living at the time, about how he wrote sword and sorcery,
and how he used Freudian imagery, and the basic appeal of sword and sorcery.
That gave me the idea that if Hitler had not become the fuhrer of Germany, he
could have as well winded up writing sword and sorcery. And I've always been
fascinated with the whole question of how a thing like Nazism could really
happen. And none of the stuff I had read about that really satisfied me,
political or economic or conventional explanations of how this happened. And the
two things came together. And my insight about Nazism was that it was a
psychosexual phenomenon and that Hitler came to power by, in effect,
manipulating imagery
and psychosexual substructures, rather than by a coherent economic program and
so forth. And this has a certain correlation with a certain kind of sword and
sorcery, and that was the basic impetus that generated the book. Has anyone
really misunderstood that book and called you a fascist or anything like that?
Rarely. No, rarely, rarely. Actually, not really. The book is going to be
published in Germany next year I don't know what's going to happen then
No, the only kind of misunderstanding That I read In a review that I really got
Was a little bit different It was somebody who said Well, this is really all
good fun I really enjoyed this book Why did he have to muck it up with all this
stuff about Hitler And all the extraneous paraphernalia It was just a good,
rousing adventure tale Yeah That is the only kind of misreading of the book
that's really taken place. Actually, I have not been called a Nazi or a fascist
by anyone that I know of in connection with that book. After you published that
book, if I'm reading your schedule of writing correctly, from 1972 to about 1979
when you published The World Between, you didn't do any science fiction.
Well, yes and no. I mean, World Between was written about 77 or 78, 77, I guess,
76, 77. And because of various publishing screw-ups, it took a while to come
out. But after I wrote The Iron Dream, my next book was Passing Through the
Flame, which was a very long, mainstream novel. up. Then I actually wrote
another main, see, the schedule, everything was screwed up. I wrote Passing
Through the Flame after the Iron Dream. Then I wrote another mainstream novel
called The Mind Game, which just came out this August due to various publishing
screw-ups. And then I wrote A World Between. So there were two mainstream books
in between in terms of what, you know, which came out in different order, but
that was the order in which they were written. Well, A World Between was the
next science fiction novel, all, though, after the archery that I wrote. I
thought that maybe you'd gotten tired of science fiction or something. No, I
did. I had gotten tired of science fiction a while, and I did write two
mainstream books in between. A rather long ones. Okay, The World Between, again,
I'm not sure of my ground here, but The World Between and Songs from the Stars,
I see those as sort of a different old kind of writing for you, sort of a
mellowing down in Songs from the Stars and the World Between Both the conflict
is between extremes and then you sort of advocate a medial position a grey area
as the proper place to be would that be a correct response to those? I think
that'd be a correct response to A World Between. I'm not so sure about Songs
from the Stars I think again this is all, you know, I guess what I'm getting
into now is books about the fallacy of dualistic thinking and I think that's
part of what Songs from the Stars is more about. Songs from the Stars, I think
the position, you know, the ultimate positive position that is shown is not so
much a position in between the two conflicting signs but one that transcends
both of them that's in a much larger context. I would say in general that up
until I guess the world between really, a lot of my stuff was kind of critical
fiction, critical of this, critical of existing societies, critical of various
things that were going on. A World Between is meant as a utopian novel, really,
in any kind of way. And it's a prescriptive kind of book. It's more of, instead
of presenting critical images of other things, that the idea is to create a more
positive image of a more positive kind of future. I think if you spend enough
time when criticizing what exists, at some point you have some kind of moral
obligation to present something more positive and replace what you find
negative. Yeah, that's maybe the way I should have said it instead of mellowing.
Yeah, I recognize for the first time I can see you advocating some things rather
than criticizing. Okay. In the world between, would you say that Carlotta and
Royce would describe your, I guess your ideal male-female relationship, equality
and all that? Well, yes and no. It's a relationship that evolves in the book.
In other words, the problem with writing a utopian novel is being too grammatic
about it, being too black and white about it, having all the positive characters
be all positive, having what you want to show is a positive relationship, being
a perfect relationship and I don't think I was trying not to do that there the
way it comes out that way and I think that is a positive relationship but I
would want to say that it's perfect I mean in the beginning of the book it's a
little bit of a reverse a subtle kind of reverse of present things in other
words Royce is subtly a little downtrodden in the beginning and sort of gains a
truer and less superficial equality as the book progresses. Okay, the Institute
for Transcendental Science obviously is one of the extremes in the book. Where
would you say their error was exactly? Well, I think... Well, their error...
That's a complicated question. But I think basically there are two areas of
error in transcendental science. One is the unexamined, subtle male chauvinist
bias to their culture, and the other one is the ultimate conviction that what
they are doing is the absolute most important thing in the universe, and that
therefore they are morally entitled to run over other people's cultures and
desires. Absolutism I guess would be, even the kind of theocratic absolutism
would be their flaw. Not the Faustian thing at all because I do see Faust as a
hero. Okay. Every once in a while I detect in your work a tendency to identify a
character or movement with an actual person. Was I correct in picking out the
name Shockley as the founder of that thing? that was meant as a... Well, it was
thrown in there, but it wasn't meant as a direct reference
to Sean Lin. However, you know, you can read that stuff into there. I don't
know. In another book, I named a character after the wolfman in that movie. Now
I can't remember his name. But it was a subconscious thing that I did. I don't
think that wasn't a direct reference really. Okay, the femocrats in that book,
the femocracy, do you get any feedback from Women's Lib on something like that?
The strange thing about the reaction to that book has been that a certain number
of men have reacted in a kind of male liberal guilt, male feminist kind of
reaction against that. for the most part, women have liked the book. Women have
identified with it more than men. Actually, I even got one or two good reviews
in feminist places. I think that's not quite what I expected, but that seems to
be the way it happened. I have not gotten heavy feminist from that. A little
bit, but not much. Not much, because I think women who are involved in feminism
or have been or know women who are, can recognize a certain aspect a certain
aspect of the feminist movement in the Femocrats. Whereas men who are trying to
show how liberated they are would not dream of admitting such a thing. Whereas
women have had experience with that kind of mentality. Strangely enough. I
didn't expect the reaction to be that way. I expected it to be reversed, but
that's not the way it was. Okay. I'd like to move on to Songs from the Stars. We
fortunately got a hold of a copy of that. That guy you put us on to, John
Douglas, sent one. Just a personal response, first of all. I think that's a
Nebula book. I think it deserves the award. One never knows what wins the
Nebulas. Well, I don't know what your response to an award like that is anyhow,
but I was... Well, you know, my response to an award like that is it's nice to
get awards and you make money by being able to put awards on your books, but you
see what's won and what hasn't. You can't take it as a very serious literary
judgment. Anyway, just from my personal standpoint I thought it was your best
novel. The way I read this, you said a few words about it before, but it was
almost to me a plea for people to join hands, to meet the challenge of the
future. You have almost a fairy tale with a hero, a heroine, a world in danger,
alien contact, the future hanging in the balance. Did you mean to echo those
kinds of traditional themes? Make it that kind of a story? Well, I don't know.
No, I think that's
exactly what I was trying to do. It's not good to ask writers what they're
trying to do in that sense, because any book that's any good, you're really
writing it half out of your subconscious, and you're not planning every aspect
of everything, thematic aspect of what people later read into it. Again, it's a
book against duality. You have two fragmented societies, they're both...
Both are kind of like half societies. The Aquarian society there is a very nice
thing that works, except it really only works because it accepts something from
the black scientists which it doesn't want to admit that it's accepting. And the
black scientists are, again, another kind of absolutism
which doesn't sell it. It's a book about higher unity, I guess, rather than that
the conflict is really superficial. And it mirrors the present thing in our
society where on the one hand you have a great big space movement and people
wanting to get into space and all the old people and all that stuff. On the
other hand, you have a real atavistic neoludite movement, an anti-nuclear
movement, which is really kind of willfully ignorant of a lot of things. In a
way, these are the two things that could bring about the crash,
as well as what would survive it. So I think it's basically a book about the
grand philosophical attempt of that book is to try and bridge the gap between
science and reason and feeling, emotion, and mysticism. and to... you know, to
point to a higher unity between the two things, and away from the false
dichotomies and false dualisms, which seem to be really destroying western
civilization. That's a large statement. Okay, yeah, yeah, I can accept that. The
higher unity you talk about, I would relate that somehow, the way that Clear,
Blue, Lew follows, and the songs that represent alien contact, he sort of blends
his way, the earthly one, into a sort of a galactic one. Yeah. Do you think
we're going to meet helpful creatures like the aliens in that book that you...
Well, yes, as I said in the book, I do believe that any civilization that's
going to last a million years, it's going to be a million years or whatever or
even 100,000 years more advanced than us. They've been around that much longer
and that much more advanced science. If it's going to survive to that length of
its own history, it's got to solve it. It's got to be, by that time,
philosophically and emotionally pretty together or long since it destroyed
itself. We certainly will not survive a million years of our own history if it
continues as it has. Obviously not. I think the idea that advanced aliens can be
malignant is very dubious. Are you following what I'm saying? Yes. That any
civilization that survives a million years of its own history has had to have
gotten its political, psychological, and philosophical act together. And I don't
see why. I, you know, and I do believe that if and when we run into that kind of
really advanced civilizations, that they will, if not be directly actively
helpful, certainly will be benign and will not be interested in either eating us
or conquering our planet or blowing us up or anything like that. Okay, David
needs to stop it. Okay.
I sort of know the answer to this question already because you made it kind of
plain but just for the listeners on the show the alien races that are contacted
the songs you portrayed all of these people civilizations, galaxies away being
destroyed and then you let Lou and Sue know that wouldn't that cause a futility
in their quest where they're going to unite the earth and go for the stars if
they know that any civilization even that advance is going to end. Well, yes and
no, I suppose. I mean, that is the existential position of all people, really.
And the time frame we're talking about is millions of years.
Well, everybody already knows that the lifespan of the universe or the sun or
whatever is finite.
I didn't want it to be a pink bunny rabbit story. And that is why I put that in
there. No, well, I mean, it kills Harker. He can't take it. They can't. Because
they can deal with that existential reality as those other civilizations could.
Okay. This is sort of a general question. It refers to Songs from the Stars but
also your other works.
In the way you treat the media, I think almost every novel you've read has had
something to do with the media. I take it that you would have an ambivalent
attitude toward the use of the media. If it's done properly, it's great. If it's
used for the wrong kind of power, it's bad. Like Sue, for instance, uses it to
sort of make a media hype, you know, where they dress up the harker as an alien
and try to sell it to the people and so forth. In other words, if it serves a
good purpose, also like in the electronic democracy in a world between, media's
a good thing if it's used properly. Would that be a... Yeah, well, media is a
powerful tool. It's a very powerful tool. It's the most powerful political tool
ever invented, among other things. And my attitude towards that is the same as
my attitude towards power. Power is morally neutral. The media is morally
neutral. It all depends on what you do with it. People do good things. People do
bad things. Their tools don't do good things or bad things. This is just a very,
very powerful tool. I've written books in which it's used for good, and I've
written books in which it's used for evil, and um, and I've written books in
which it's used for both." And you'd probably say the same thing about the
treatment of science? This is the tool, like the media. Yeah, science is, if you
look, maybe that's the ultimate, maybe that's what's ultimately wrong, the era
of transcendental science, is that they look, is looking to science as a moral
guide, or as a, you know, as a guide for the answer to philosophical or personal
or emotional questions. I don't think science is supposed to be that at all.
Contrary-wise, I don't think that people's emotions or feelings or fears are
very good guides to scientific research either. I think science is there to get
out factual truths and to create instrumentalities and physical power and that's
what it does and it's not, again, it's morally neutral. It's what people do with
it that counts. But if you try and make science into a philosophy, science
itself becomes your philosophy, then you really have an empty philosophy because
science is not designed or meant to deal with moral philosophical questions in
that way. Okay. One episode you had, it was a minor one, but it was In the World
Between. It impressed me. It's A World Between. Oh, I'm sorry. In A World
Between. You call this sort of a utopia novel already, at least on Pacifica, the
planet. Royce's flying boat, he's out there sailing, first of all, it looks like
a regular sailing boat, and it's an idyllic scene in the islands and the ocean
and stuff. Then when he has to get back, it becomes a supersonic flyer in a
matter of minutes. That kind of bland of technology and, you know, the clean
blue world was, I took that as a, you know, sort of a meaningful thing. I'm not
sure you meant it that way or not. Well, I meant it that way. I mean, for, for,
on Pacific, transportation is aesthetic, you know. In other words, if you're
going to have to spend time traveling someplace, you might as well enjoy it.
That's why I hate the 55 mile an hour speed limit. I enjoy driving good cars
fast, among other things like that. Yeah, I don't think that technology is the
enemy of a clean, well-run world, far from it. Again, science is a tool if you
understand it completely. And so many people call themselves ecologists, as if
it's a philosophy or a political orientation when it's really a name for a
certain branch of science, of which these people know nothing.
The only way that you can have an ecologically soundly managed planet is by
having a scientific knowledge of what that takes and what it is. By using the
necessary technology to have a good human environment that doesn't conflict with
having a good natural environment. I feel almost obligated somewhere in this
interview to ask you a question I'm sure you've had many times before. Just a
little bit about the so-called new wave thing. I've read your views on it, and I
admire very much what you had to say in your introduction to modern science
fiction and so forth. What about just a question like, what caused the new wave
to happen? Was it a social thing, a social unrest, Vietnam, mainstream authors
switching to science fiction? Was there something social that would cause that
kind of shift in emphasis in the field of science fiction? No, I don't think it
was a shift in emphasis. I think it was simply that prior to that that there
were stylized
rules of what could be written and what couldn't be written in science fiction,
which were caused by a variety of things, but one, by the fact that science
fiction was perceived by librarians as juvenile literature, so that meant you
had certain limitations in sex. There was an unconscious assumption that you had
to be positive about science. There was a whole set of stylizations and formulas
around the field, And for two generations, the science fiction writers had come
into the field through fandom and through reading other science fiction. In the
60s, a lot of people came into the field from various different directions that
weren't the same as the one unified direction. So people started writing science
fiction to a lot of people, who had very little in common with each other,
except that they were not wedded to the old traditional way of doing things. and
of course this mirrored the cultural climate at the time it mirrored what was
happening politically it mirrored what was happening in music it mirrored what
was happening in movies it was a phenomenon that went through the western
civilization as a whole so in a sense it was a reflection of that in a sense it
was one of the things that caused that because it happened fairly early in
another way it was something that was really catalyzed by Mike Moorcock who was
a very pivotal figure in the whole thing without Mike Boorcock, none of it might
have happened. So it's a mistake to say that this was a school of writing or a
style of writing or any one thing. It wasn't. It was a breaking of the old
conventional parameters. So the people who felt their toes were being stepped on
because these parameters were being broken tried to identify all the various
entirely different things that were breaking the old parameters as one thing, as
the new wave that they could then attack. I mean, it's ridiculous. Anybody that
could have attacked Michael Moorcock as a nihilist was insane because Mike was
the idealist of the age kind of, and he was pumping his own money into this
thing and really had strong idealistic beliefs and they could have been
involved. It cost him about 20,000 pounds, and Mike was anything but a nihilist.
Usually people who call other people nihilists are really saying, this person
violates my beliefs, therefore he believes in nothing. because he doesn't
believe in what I believe in. And that's what really happened. There was an old
wave, but there was never, as a coherent philosophy in the school of science
fiction, there was never a new wave in the same sense. There were a lot of
waves. There were a lot of different people doing a lot of different things. The
people that were identified as new wave were very diverse. I mean, what I was
actually writing was very different to say what Tom Dish was writing, or
Boulard, or Zelazny, Delaney, who were also identified as new wave writers. this
stuff is much more you know Zelazny and Delaney and myself Boulard and all this
and Mike we were all there were more differences between our work than between
our work taking its totality and the old stuff there was more difference within
the so called new wave than there was within the so called old wave it was much
more unanimity among the people who were attacking the new wave as being a
coherent school than there was among people who are being labeled as a new race.
Okay, great. Yeah, that's the kind of thing we like to hear. The reading I've
been doing of your, say, in The Locust and some writing interviews you've had in
other publications and so forth, you seem to be saying that the separation
between science fiction and mainstream is sort of an artificial thing that's
been created by publishers and fans and so forth. Would that be your position?
Would I be correct in stating it that way? Well, I would generalize it more. I
think modern American publishing is all categories. Everything is a category.
Science fiction, westerns, bestsellers, literary books, they're all categorized.
There's no such thing as a general novel. Everything is packaged in a way to
look like something. How many times do you see a book that comes out that says
bestseller? The book has just come out. But it's labeled a bestseller because
that's the category. There are many unsuccessful bestsellers, strangers that may
seem, because they use that as a category. It means they do a certain kind of
package. They promote it a certain kind of way. And they want a certain kind of
book. And that's a bestseller. A great many things that are called bestsellers
flop. So they're not really bestsellers. Same thing with so-called literary
books. Literary books are packaged in a certain way to appeal to a certain small
audience, to draw the attention of the people who do the New York Times book
reviews. And that's the genre, too. So it's not something that's simply been
done to science fiction. It's dental. Every kind of literature published in the
United States today, everything is a category. But haven't you said, though,
that, like, I got the impression in one of your columns that you felt that
science fiction wasn't being treated fairly, say, by the book reviewers, the
people who could... No, it isn't. It is, you know, as a category, you know, it
is treated very unfailing and very cavalierly by the powers that be, which is
mainly the New York Times Book Review and the New York Review of Books and the
so-called New York literary establishment, which really does have a very heavy
effect on the way books are published. These people, for instance, came down on
the American Book Awards, succeeded in getting science fiction knocked out of
the American Book Awards. A real small clique of people in New York City who
felt that it was really bad to have these awards given to things like science
fiction, that it was bad to take it away from a small jury which they could
control and have thousands of people voting for. A very elitist, social-fascist
bunch of people who I have absolutely no use for. And I'm sure they have no use
for me. Well, they certainly demonstrated that. I've been mentioned in the New
York Times Book Review twice. Once, when the Iron Dream was in America, was a
National Book Award recommendee. And once when I was nominated for American Book
Award, neither of those books, which they were forced to mention because it was
news, was ever reviewed in that rank. And that's kind of the general attitude of
these people towards science fiction. Has a science fiction book or anything
close to it ever won or been nominated for consideration for the award that you
know of? Well, a classic case was at the National Book Award. Leslie Fiedler won
in my book. There were only three judges. There were three-judge panelists. at
that time. Fiedler wanted it considered for the award and it was on the initial
list because of him. The other two judges refused to read it because it was
science fiction. They refused to read it. So that's how much chance you have of
winning one of those awards in competition with other... They actually refused
to read it. I didn't find this out until years later when Fiedler was being
interviewed on the Buckley show, William Buckley show. And told the story I had
no idea that that had happened, but it did happen. Things may be a little bit
different now, but they're probably not. You're talking sort of packaging and
categories here, but you think if this kind of packaging or category approach to
literature were removed, that science fiction would, among, I don't know,
scholarly people or whatever, that it would have a higher reputation, or it
would be equal to mainstream material? Well, if categories were removed, there
wouldn't be any categories. People would judge books not on, not on what the
content is, but how well it's handled. I mean, it's pretty, you know, if you
think about it, it's pretty unlikely to say that because you're writing about
the future or because you're writing about a world that isn't, or using
speculative material, that necessarily all the books that are written that way
are going to be inferior to contemporary novels in terms of the writing, in
terms of how good it is. And if there weren't any categories, These books should
be judged on their relative qualities and not on their content. What about
Europe? I understand that you do very well over there, your reputation. Do they
do it differently? I mean, do they categorize that way too? They do and they
don't. France is my best country, and that's a good example. Every book is also
categorized. In other words, they have what they call collections. Every
publisher has various collections of novels. They'll have a science fiction
collection. But they'll have a collection of so-called mainstream novels or
something that is the collection of a particular editor who even has a name on
the collection. So this collection reflects this editor's taste, and it's
labeled that way and it's given a name. So in a sense, everything is
categorized. But there's less approbation between the categories, since
everything is categorized under a name chosen by the, you know, to identify this
line of, this bunch of books what the editor was actually editing them. There's
not so much stigma having a category, because everything is that kind of
category, although everything is categorized, the categories are a bit more
equal. Also, they give you a lot, you know, they have much more respect. They
understand that a lot of everything is crap, but there's no particular reason
why a science fiction novel shouldn't be as good as anything else and still be a
science fiction novel if it's that good. And so while they do still pay
attention to categories, they do not automatically discount something because
it's science fiction. Yeah, I was talking to a friend of mine this morning who
was over in Europe a few years ago, and he said, you know, that he'd noticed
many books by, you know, you over there translations, but yet he had not read
you over here, which implied to me that you must be better known or at least
more appreciated. Well, I just came back from three weeks of France doing book
publicity in Paris and publicity for the record I made there. I think, not only
do I think that I am more, you know, relatively more known in France than I am
here, but I think that writers in general are more important in France than they
are here. Writing is more, literature is more central to the popular culture of
France, say, than it is to the popular culture of the United States in general.
People have a different attitude towards writing and towards writers. there's a
certain generalized American anti-intellectualism anyway. This does not exist in
France. In other European countries, this atmosphere of anti-intellectualism.
And so writers in general are considered more important in France. And I'm
considered more important in science fiction. It's a deep cultural attitude that
reflects partly the fact that my books are more popular there. Partly the fact
that it's more important to be a writer. Okay, what about, just on this question
of science, how it's considered by the public and so forth, do you think the
movies and television hurt the image of science fiction? I mean, to be treated
as a serious literature, do you think they detract or hurt it? Oh, I don't know.
I don't think they... Not really. I mean, the image of science fiction, in that
respect, has been very bad anyway. I don't think the movies really add to the
image, but I don't think they detract from it, either. If there were some
better, more sophisticated movies they might film. As it is, it's just kind of
neutral publicity, people more aware that it exists. I think it's positive and
it will prove to be positive in the long range, because a lot of people are
being introduced to the imagery of science fiction, with which they were
unfamiliar through these movies. And if you look at the evolution in the movies,
you find that in the earlier science fiction movies, if you're going into space
or whatever it is, you had to spend like half an hour setting a thing. This is a
spaceship. but it takes off from the Earth people float around it you know you
have to familiarize the audience with all this unfamiliar imagery now they can
just start a movie bang right off in a galaxy far away boom here's a spaceship
Nostromo pow you know in other words the first half hour of the conventional old
time science fiction movie is gone because people are now familiar with this
imagery and I think these movies have brought a lot of new people into
familiarity with these images they made these images part of the popular culture
uh These movies have been mainly aimed at kids and adolescents. Ten years from
now, assuming that these people ever read anything, they will be ready to read
science fiction of a more serious kind, assuming they're ready to read
literature of a more serious kind at all, because they'll be familiar with the
material, familiar with the literature. It won't seem strange and weird to them,
because they will have grown up with it. That's why I think even magazines like
Starlock in that sense will have a long-term positive impact.